AI #1944 (DiscountHandling extension): Add DiscountHandling refactoring to attribute normative requirements update (#2166)
FinOps-Open-Cost-and-Usage-Spec/FOCUS_Spec: specification/appendix/discount_handling.md

Author: ### Consider removing DiscountHandling attribute without introducing Appendix section

I would like to propose that if we agree on the DiscountHandling requirements refactoring in version 1.4, we remove the DiscountHandling attribute entirely without introducing it as an Appendix section.

**Reasoning:**

* **Scope is incomplete.** The attribute focuses primarily on commitment discounts but does not mention ContractApplied, the Contract Commitment dataset, or contract commitments in general — which are now central to how FOCUS represents discounts.
* **Some content is already covered elsewhere.** The glossary contains a definition of amortization, and the Commitment Discounts appendix provides coverage of commitment discount scenarios including purchasing, usage, and amortization.
* **Credit definition is not aligned.** The attribute states that "any price or cost reductions that are awarded after the fact are identified as a 'Credit' Charge Category" (e.g., threshold-based rebates). However, the glossary defines Credit as "a financial incentive or allowance granted by a service provider unrelated to other past/current/future charges." These two statements appear to conflict.

### Future consideration:

In a future release, we should consider introducing an Appendix section that provides a comprehensive view of discounts, covering ContractApplied, the Contract Commitment dataset, and commitment discounts together. A prerequisite for this would be to clarify whether commitment discounts are also considered contract commitments and whether they must be represented via ContractApplied. Currently, this is not explicit in the requirements — I believe this was intentionally left vague — but I would note that commitment discounts are mentioned as examples in the Contract Commitment context.

Reviewer: I would be in favor of striking some of the content in Discount Handling -- especially the amortization definition, which feels out of place.

However: given that we have had a Discount Handling attribute in the spec since 1.0 preview, and people will likely be looking for it (perhaps with a Ctrl-F "Discount Handling"), I'd rather have _something_ in the spec that represents this and points people where to go.  See my suggestion [here](https://github.com/FinOps-Open-Cost-and-Usage-Spec/FOCUS_Spec/pull/2166/files#r3040269503) for adding a table that points folks to all the places they would find normative requirements related to discounts.

Even if it's a skeleton that we flesh out later, I think that's better than striking it completely.

Reviewer: Discussed in Apr 6 Maintainers.  Agreed to retain a slimmed-down appendix with a reference table to all the places in the spec discount handling requirements exist.

Author: Updated version of the Discount Handling appendix section available. Open for feedback 😄

Reviewer: Looks good!

Reviewer: It looks like several strict normative rules were deleted from the original `discount_handling.md` file, but they don't seem to have been migrated to new homes in this specific PR.

Please confirm/deny that these rules are already safely housed in their respective column definition files (like `billedcost.md`, `effectivecost.md`, `chargecategory.md`, etc.). If they aren't already there, we'll need to add them to this PR so we don't accidentally drop these requirements from the specification:

* **BilledCost:** `The BilledCost MUST be 0 for any row where the commitment covers the entire cost for the charge period.`
* **EffectiveCost:** `The EffectiveCost MUST include the portion of the amortized purchase cost that applies to this row.`
* **Amortization Math:** `The sum of the EffectiveCost for all rows where CommitmentDiscountStatus is "Used" or "Unused" for each CommitmentDiscountId over the entire commitment period MUST be the same as the total BilledCost of the commitment discount.`
* **ChargeCategory (Purchase):** `ChargeCategory MUST be set to "Purchase" on rows that represent a purchase of a commitment discount.`
* **ChargeCategory (Credit):** `Credits that are applied after the fact MUST use a ChargeCategory of "Credit".`
* **CommitmentDiscountStatus:** `CommitmentDiscountStatus MUST be "Used" for ChargeCategory "Usage" rows that received a reduced price from a commitment.`

Author: I assumed a spreadsheet format would be easier to follow, which is why I attached [the link](https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1jQPNCuAbzSdfFNaS5NatdkwEVQthwbtlHlrVa2vRHRA/edit?gid=350649430#gid=350649430) in the PR description.

That said, here is the summary:

| Original Requirement | Status | Location | Covered By |
| :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- |
| BilledCost MUST be 0 for any row where the commitment covers the entire cost for the charge period. | Already covered | billedcost.md | "BilledCost MUST be 0 for *charges* that are fully *covered* by one or more *covering charges*." |
| EffectiveCost MUST include the portion of the amortized purchase cost that applies to this row. | Already covered | effectivecost.md | "EffectiveCost MUST include any portion of the BilledCost of *covering* purchase *charges* (i.e., ChargeCategory is "Purchase") that is applied to this *charge*." |
| The sum of the EffectiveCost... MUST be the same as the total BilledCost of the commitment discount. | Already covered | effectivecost.md | "The sum of EffectiveCost across all related *covering* and *covered charges* MUST equal the sum of BilledCost across the same set of *charges*, within the *charge period* of the *covering charges*, when both the *covering* and *covered charges* are present in the dataset." |
| ChargeCategory MUST be set to "Purchase" on rows that represent a purchase of a commitment discount. | Already covered | chargecategory.md | Allowed values: "Purchase: Positive or negative *charges* for the acquisition of a service or resource bought upfront or on a recurring basis including refunds." |
| Credits that are applied after the fact MUST use a ChargeCategory of "Credit". | Covered and Conflict | chargecategory.md | **Allowed values:** Credit: Positive or negative *charges* granted by the service provider for various scenarios e.g promotional credits or corrections to promotional credits.<br>**Note:**<br> - This conflicts with the glossary definition of Credit, which defines it as "a financial incentive or allowance granted by a service provider unrelated to other past/current/future charges." <br>- When the glossary definition was introduced (1.2), we didn't consider that Credit was also mentioned in DiscountHandling. Given this conflict, I believe we should rely on the ChargeCategory allowed value definition and omit the conflicting requirement from DiscountHandling. |
| CommitmentDiscountStatus MUST be "Used" for ChargeCategory "Usage" rows that received a reduced price from a commitment. | Already covered | commitmentdiscountstatus.md | **Nullability Requirement:**<br>CommitmentDiscountStatus MUST NOT be null when CommitmentDiscountId is not null and Charge Category is "Usage". <br>**Allowed values:** Used: Charges that utilized a specific amount of a commitment discount.  |

Reviewer: I agree that the first three are handled via #1966.  

I disagree that we are sufficiently handling the last three.  That said, I have opened specific comments for each of those elsewhere, so I am resolving this comment, and we can discuss further in those threads.

In [Cost and Usage](#datasets.costandusage), cost and unit price columns reflect the effect of discounts. Discounts associated with [*contract commitments*](#glossary:contract-commitment) are further identified and attributed using the [Contract Applied](#datasets.costandusage.contractapplied) column (also serves as an association to the [Contract Commitment](#datasets.contractcommitment) dataset), as well as [*commitment discount*](#glossary:commitment-discount)-specific columns. [*Custom columns*](#glossary:custom-column) may be used when needed to further identify or describe discounts.

For additional context and related normative requirements associated with discount handling, refer to the following specification sections:

> | Concept | Description | Entity | Specification Location |
> | :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- |
> | **General dataset rules** | Handling unused portions, splitting discounted charges, and avoiding negating rows | Dataset | [CostAndUsage](#datasets.costandusage) |
> | **Effect of discounts** | Reflecting reduced pricing from discounts | Column | [CostAndUsage.BilledCost](#datasets.costandusage.billedcost), [CostAndUsage.EffectiveCost](#datasets.costandusage.effectivecost), [CostAndUsage.ContractedCost](#datasets.costandusage.contractedcost), [CostAndUsage.ListdCost](#datasets.costandusage.listcost), [CostAndUsage.ContractedUnitPrice](#datasets.costandusage.contractedunitprice), [CostAndUsage.ListUnitPrice](#datasets.costandusage.listunitprice) |
> | **Commitment Discount specifics** | Identification and utilizatio of *commitment discounts* | Column | [CostAndUsage.CommitmentDiscountId](#datasets.costandusage.commitmentdiscountid), [CostAndUsage.CommitmentDiscountStatus](#datasets.costandusage.commitmentdiscountStatus) |
> | **Resource tracking** | Identifying the exact resource that received the commitment discount | Column | [CostAndUsage.ResourceId](#datasets.costandusage.resourceid) |
> | **Contract allocations** | Associating a charge with specific contract commitments | Column | [CostAndUsage.ContractApplied](#datasets.costandusage.contractapplied) |

Reviewer: Fix typos, and add line returns between columns, using `<br>`.

| Concept | Description | Entity | Specification Location |
| :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- |
| **General dataset rules** | Handling unused portions, splitting discounted charges, and avoiding negating rows | Dataset | [CostAndUsage](#datasets.costandusage) |
| **Effect of discounts** | Reflecting reduced pricing from discounts | Column | [CostAndUsage.BilledCost](#datasets.costandusage.billedcost)<br>[CostAndUsage.EffectiveCost](#datasets.costandusage.effectivecost)<br>[CostAndUsage.ContractedCost](#datasets.costandusage.contractedcost)<br>[CostAndUsage.ListCost](#datasets.costandusage.listcost)<br>[CostAndUsage.ContractedUnitPrice](#datasets.costandusage.contractedunitprice)<br>[CostAndUsage.ListUnitPrice](#datasets.costandusage.listunitprice) |
| **Commitment Discount specifics** | Identification and utilization of *commitment discounts* | Column | [CostAndUsage.CommitmentDiscountId](#datasets.costandusage.commitmentdiscountid)<br>[CostAndUsage.CommitmentDiscountStatus](#datasets.costandusage.commitmentdiscountstatus) |
| **Resource tracking** | Identifying the exact resource that received the commitment discount | Column | [CostAndUsage.ResourceId](#datasets.costandusage.resourceid) |
| **Contract allocations** | Associating a charge with specific contract commitments | Column | [CostAndUsage.ContractApplied](#datasets.costandusage.contractapplied) |

```suggestion
| Concept | Description | Entity | Specification Location |
| :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- |
| **General dataset rules** | Handling unused portions, splitting discounted charges, and avoiding negating rows | Dataset | [CostAndUsage](#datasets.costandusage) |
| **Effect of discounts** | Reflecting reduced pricing from discounts | Column | [CostAndUsage.BilledCost](#datasets.costandusage.billedcost)<br>[CostAndUsage.EffectiveCost](#datasets.costandusage.effectivecost)<br>[CostAndUsage.ContractedCost](#datasets.costandusage.contractedcost)<br>[CostAndUsage.ListCost](#datasets.costandusage.listcost)<br>[CostAndUsage.ContractedUnitPrice](#datasets.costandusage.contractedunitprice)<br>[CostAndUsage.ListUnitPrice](#datasets.costandusage.listunitprice) |
| **Commitment Discount specifics** | Identification and utilization of *commitment discounts* | Column | [CostAndUsage.CommitmentDiscountId](#datasets.costandusage.commitmentdiscountid)<br>[CostAndUsage.CommitmentDiscountStatus](#datasets.costandusage.commitmentdiscountstatus) |
| **Resource tracking** | Identifying the exact resource that received the commitment discount | Column | [CostAndUsage.ResourceId](#datasets.costandusage.resourceid) |
| **Contract allocations** | Associating a charge with specific contract commitments | Column | [CostAndUsage.ContractApplied](#datasets.costandusage.contractapplied) |
```

Amortization is a process used to break down and spread purchase costs over a *period* of time. When a purchase is applicable to resources, like *commitment discounts*, the amortized cost of a resource takes the initial payment and *period* into account and distributes it out based on the resource's usage, attributing the prorated cost for each unit of billing. Amortization enables users of billing data to distribute purchase charges to the appropriate audience in support of cost allocation efforts. Discount Handling for purchased commitments is commonly used for scenarios like calculating utilization and implementing chargeback for the purchase amount.

> While service providers may use different terms to describe discounts, FOCUS identifies a discount as being a reduced price applied directly to a row. Any price or cost reductions that are awarded after the fact are identified as a "Credit" Charge Category. One example might be when a service provider offers a reduced rate after passing a certain threshold of usage or spend.

Reviewer: Moving the normative requirements out of an attribute and into the actual datasets and columns where they apply makes the specification much cleaner and structurally sound.

That said, I have a concern about discoverability. Now that the strict `MUST` and `SHOULD` rules are spread across multiple files, a new practitioner looking for a complete checklist of discount handling rules might have a hard time tracking them all down.

To solve this without duplicating any of the normative text (which would be a maintenance headache), I suggest adding a cross-reference table to the bottom of the `discount_handling.md` appendix. This provides a central hub for readers to find what they need while preserving your new architecture.

I've included the suggested markdown below, but in-line with this comment so you can read it, as well as in suggestion form so you can include it and/or tweak it from there.

## Normative Requirements Reference

While this appendix provides a conceptual overview of discount handling, the strict normative requirements (`MUST` and `SHOULD` statements) for representing discounts in a FOCUS dataset are defined directly within the relevant dataset and column specifications. 

To implement discount handling correctly, refer to the normative requirements in the following sections:

| Concept | Description | Entity | Specification Location |
| :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- |
| **General dataset rules** | Handling unused portions, splitting discounted charges, and avoiding negating rows | Dataset | [CostAndUsage](#datasets.costandusage) |
| **Commitment identifiers** | Linking purchases and unused portions to specific commitments | Column | [CostAndUsage.CommitmentDiscountId](#datasets.costandusage.commitmentdiscountid) |
| **Resource tracking** | Identifying the exact resource that received the commitment discount | Column | [CostAndUsage.ResourceId](#datasets.costandusage.resourceid) |
| **Contract allocations** | Associating a charge with specific contract commitments | Column | [CostAndUsage.ContractApplied](#datasets.costandusage.contractapplied) |

```suggestion
While service providers may use different terms to describe discounts, FOCUS identifies a discount as being a reduced price applied directly to a row. Any price or cost reductions that are awarded after the fact are identified as a "Credit" Charge Category. One example might be when a service provider offers a reduced rate after passing a certain threshold of usage or spend.

## Normative Requirements Reference

While this appendix provides a conceptual overview of discount handling, the strict normative requirements (`MUST` and `SHOULD` statements) for representing discounts in a FOCUS dataset are defined directly within the relevant dataset and column specifications. 

To implement discount handling correctly, refer to the normative requirements in the following sections:

| Concept | Description | Entity | Specification Location |
| :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- |
| **General dataset rules** | Handling unused portions, splitting discounted charges, and avoiding negating rows | Dataset | [CostAndUsage](#datasets.costandusage) |
| **Commitment identifiers** | Linking purchases and unused portions to specific commitments | Column | [CostAndUsage.CommitmentDiscountId](#datasets.costandusage.commitmentdiscountid) |
| **Resource tracking** | Identifying the exact resource that received the commitment discount | Column | [CostAndUsage.ResourceId](#datasets.costandusage.resourceid) |
| **Contract allocations** | Associating a charge with specific contract commitments | Column | [CostAndUsage.ContractApplied](#datasets.costandusage.contractapplied) |
```

Reviewer: Looks like you applied this.  Resolving.
